i want to update you on the latest
coronavirus data and the
vaccine rollout in the last week in the
uk
we have seen 37 258
cases of coronavirus on average each day
the nhs is under intense pressure
across all parts of the country with 37
899 people in uk hospitals
with covid19 and that includes 4076
people on ventilators
sadly today 592
more deaths were reported and we must
never forget the real impact of this
disease
the loved ones that we've lost
grandparents parents
friends colleagues we grieve for each
one
and the pressure on the front line i can
tell you is just so
relentless and when i talk to colleagues
who are working in the
covert wards they are flat out and
they're
stretched to the limit they're doing
everything they can
and i want to say a huge thank you to
all those colleagues
who are working so hard they're pulling
a huge shift
and it's a duty on all of us to support
them
i want to extend that thanks also to our
ambulance workers
and in particular i want to thank
ambulance service
staff who stepped up over the weekend
when an appeal went out
from the scottish ambulance service for
extra help
and ambulance services from the other
nations have stepped forward
our health systems across the uk
routinely work closely together
offering support when it's needed and
from vaccines to ambulance services
we are stronger together
and the uk is stronger together in the
fight against this pandemic
and i know how tough that fight is
thankfully there are early signs that
the actions that we're taking
are working the rise in the number of
cases is slowing and falling in some
parts of the country
like london and scotland at the same
time the number of vaccinations is going
up like many of you i've been talking to
members of my family
who've just had the call to be
vaccinated it's a really emotional
moment when people get vaccinated
it means so much to people because this
vaccine
brings safety to that individual
and it marks the route out of for us all
from this pandemic and i'm very proud to
be able to tell you that
as of last night we have vaccinated 78.7
percent
of all over 80s that's almost four
in five of everyone aged over 80.
and i'm delighted that you can see from
these figures that there's so much
enthusiasm
for vaccination amongst the over 80s
because octogenarians know what
scientists know
which is that the vaccine saves lives
of course the rate limiting factor to
this
vaccination program remains supply
as we know supply is tight we've had a
very strong performance in this past
week
and i'm confident that the nhs will be
able to deliver
every shot that's made available to it
to help with that today we've opened a
further 32
large-scale vaccination centers
including at blackpool winter gardens
the black country living museum better
known to many as the set of peaky
blinders
and london's francis crick institute
which itself is no stranger to
human ingenuity and i'm determined to
get
vaccine take up as high as possible
today we're funding councils to enhance
their
vital efforts to engage those who are
hardest to reach
through our community champions scheme
as of today 6.6 million have now
received a vaccine against kovid19
that's more than one in nine
of the adult population on saturday
alone
we gave nearly half a million jabs
and in the last week two and a half
million people
have been vaccinated across the uk
there's a rate of more than 250 people a
minute
we're on track to offer everyone in the
top four priority groups a job by the
15th
of february and if you are in one of
those groups one of the top four
priority groups
and you haven't had the call yet don't
worry
the nhs will be in touch
it is a truly national effort and
alongside the gps and the pharmacists
and the other nhs staff and of course
the armed forces
who are working so hard alongside all of
them working
every weekend every evening often
i particularly want to thank the 80 000
people who've stepped forward
to help deliver this doing things like
volunteering to stand in car parks for
eight hours a day in the freezing cold
to ensure that elderly people can safely
get to the vaccination center
it's truly heartwarming and and we've
seen this selfless
attitude towards the vaccination program
and it makes me really proud and i'm
very very grateful to all those who've
stepped forward
because we know that the responsibility
for the fight back against this disease
rests on
all of us this is equally true when it
comes to maintaining the rules and
social distancing
social distancing works by denying the
vaccine
the social contact that it needs to
spread
and i want to reiterate an important
point made by the chief medical officers
and the clinical advice that they've
been giving
even if you've had the jab the rules
still apply
there's two reasons for this first
because the protection takes
time your body's immune system
is only fully trained up around three
weeks after your jab
and even if you have the protection
yourself
we still don't know whether you'll be
able to pass coronavirus on to someone
else
we're monitoring that very carefully and
we'll publish information on it as soon
as we have it available
so this is not a moment to ease up the
success of the vaccine rollout means we
cannot
we cannot put this progress at risk
the final thing i want to say is this
there is no question that the new
variants have made this fight a whole
lot tougher
and i want to set out again precisely
what we know about the new variants
as with all science as we have
throughout this unprecedented crisis
we're learning more all of the time and
the new variant that was first
discovered in kent
which comprises now a significant number
of our cases
it is spreading 30 to seventy percent
more easily
than the existing variants and based on
analysis conducted by academic
colleagues in a variety of studies
there is a realistic possibility that
this variant may be associated with
increased
mortality compared to the old variant
as well as increased transmission and
because of our extensive genomic
sequencing
we've identified cases of the new
variant first identified in south africa
and that one that was first identified
in brazil
and further scientific work is underway
to understand more about these variants
but in the meantime it reinforces the
critical message that we must be
cautious for
all of us our response must be extra
careful
stay at home maintain social distancing
and we've all
frankly sacrificed too much and it's so
important that we protect lives
and we're making progress with the
vaccine and the end is in sight
we cannot put that progress at risk
and there are promise there's a promise
of better days that lie ahead
we have to hold our nerve and persevere
through this difficult winter
so it's incumbent on us all
wherever possible to stay home protect
the nhs
and save lives we're now going to go
straight to questions
the first question is from colin
from sunbury on thames by video
some estimates suggest up to one in ten
people now have antibodies for covid19
if this is the case how close are we to
herd immunity
thanks very much colin this is very much
a scientific question
so i'll go first to dr hopkins and then
ask
dr harris if there's anything she wants
to add
so firstly to say uh colin that one
in ten people having immunity is a far
away from where we need to be in
the herd immunity is a word that we use
to describe the immunity that we get
from vaccination
the big job here is to roll out the
vaccination to those individuals first
of all to those who are at high risk of
death and hospitalization
and then to the rest of the population
once we've done that
then we will have herd immunity we
should not be focusing on getting
infection
and the consequences of this infection
it's getting us out of where we are
right now
thanks very much jenny so just to add to
susan's comments
i think the important thing here is as
secretary of state has said we are still
learning a lot about this virus about
the new variants and our body's response
to it so it's really important
we might measure antibodies at one time
we need to understand
how those antibodies remain over time
and what happens if they're challenged
again in the future
so this is still very much a learning
landscape
thanks very much uh next question from
uh
julie from walsall also by video julie
when the current lockdown ends will you
revert back to the previous tier system
or will that be rebound and a newer tier
system
in place thanks julie we're looking at
this question
right now and we're looking at the
impact that the different tiers had and
we're also
looking at where we found transmission
happened
and so that is a it's a question that
will be driven
by the science so on that point uh it's
uh it's
dr hopkins who leads within nhs test and
trace on the clinical advice to that
question so
um susan will you set out where we're up
to i think
we're we need to see our death rates
fall much lower and our hospitalizations
and the numbers of individuals
in icu decline we're at the highest
number
of individuals in icu today and numbers
of hospitalization are still twice as
high as the peak
we will look and monitor these and use
that to help inform and advise
government
on when and and how the tiering should
look in the future
thanks very much uh julie next question
is from laura koonsberg of the bbc
laura thank you very much secretary of
state um a bit like julie's question
because everybody very much wants to
know when this is all going to be over
um can you secretary of state fill out
how if not when
lockdown will start to be lifted and if
you won't tell us
why not and also to all of you perhaps
if a new variant of the disease emerges
that is more resistant to the existing
vaccines
what plans are there for the uk to be
able to develop an updated vaccine on
its own
how fast could that happen or would we
be dependent on supply chains from other
countries
thanks very much laura these are
absolutely critical questions
uh the first thing i want to say uh in
response to the first question about
the lifting of measures i mean just it's
so important
firstly to understand where we are right
now right now
we have 37 000 people in hospital with
coronavirus
that is almost twice as many as at the
first peak
back in april when there were 19 000 at
the
at the highest and there are more people
on ventilators than at any time in this
whole pandemic
so the pressure on the nhs remains huge
and we've got to get that case rate down
but of course i understand why the
yearning people have
to get out of this and the thing is that
we have to look
at the facts on the ground and we have
to monitor those
facts and of course everybody wants
to have a timeline for that but i think
most people understand why
it is difficult to put a timeline on it
because it's a matter of
monitoring the data and the fact this is
a state contingent not a time contingent
question
so the prime minister has said
when we went into this national lockdown
that we will be looking at the death
rate
the number of hospitalizations whether
there were new variants that
significantly affect the course of the
pandemic
and of course the success of the vaccine
rollout
so we'll look at all of these factors
and
make sure that we take the steps as soon
as it's safely possible to do so of
course
but when it is safe which means that
we've got to be careful
um i'm going to ask jenny harry's to to
comment on these
the the clinical input into these
decisions because i understand why
people you know want to know the answer
but it is it is difficult hence we've
set out what we'll be looking at
um and the prime minister set out when
we will be
reviewing these measures and then on the
second question
i'll ask um dr hopkins to come in on
that because that is a very
live and very important point uh you'll
have seen the announcement today from
moderna
but we're doing significant work here in
the uk
to make sure that we can
uh if we need to update the vaccination
program
then we will and in the same way that
we've managed to be right at the front
in terms of the uh the vaccine we want
to obviously stay there
so there's an awful lot of work going on
to uh uh
to deliver a vaccine uh that uh that
works under all circumstances
uh thank you secretary of state so um
thank you laura i mean i think as
secretary says that it's really
important to realize just where we are
at the moment
the lockdown was initiated as we moved
into alert level five and that meant a
serious uh risk to our health services
um and we now have uh twice the number
of people in hospital that we had at the
peak of the first wave
so we just need to keep these figures in
proportion uh we are not
out of this by a very long way and there
are three different
large areas i think we're juggling with
with clinical care
one is obviously the the current rates
that we've just described and
particularly looking at those
in our 60 year olds and above we know
those are the ones who still
are likely to require hospitalization
and intensive care use
the second one is to wait for our
understanding we have to be really
patient about the understanding
of the implementation of the vaccine
program and the third one which i think
we perhaps haven't mentioned
if many of you look outside i'm sure
you'll see some snow out there which is
alongside all of this our health service
has to deal with the
increased rate of clinical emissions due
to
winter and cold weather so it is not
simply a matter of coverage it is
actually a balancing
of all of these indicators alongside the
main covered ones to ensure that our
health services
can continue to treat us all thanks very
much indeed dr hopkins
thank you so from the point of view of
vaccine it's a very live issue
laura we are ensuring that we look at
all of the new variants that are
emerging
globally we're understanding which of
the mutations in these variants
are common and that are likely to be the
ones that will come together to cause
vaccine evasion
we will then use our global scientific
networks
to try and work with who and other
global partners
to decide what the new vaccine should
look like however
in the uk we're already leading these
discussions with our vaccine task force
and we are coming together with
scientists
to build what we think is the likely
mutations that will cause changes in our
immunity and our immune response to
vaccines
and we're already looking at how fast a
new vaccine could be built and rolled
out in this country
thanks very much the critical point
in addition to that on on the vaccine
program
the critical point is that we have a
high degree of confidence
that this vaccine that we're rolling out
in the uk right now works against the
the variance both the old variant here
and the new variant
so what matters in practice right now to
everybody watching
is when the nhs calls get that vaccine
but of course we're also doing the work
casting forward in case there's need for
an update in the same way that
the flu vaccine is updated every year
thanks very much
uh laura the next question is from tom
clark at itv tom
hello as soon as you say thank you and
firstly can i just get a bit more of an
update on those new variants from both
south africa and brazil you mentioned we
now have in the uk can you tell us
how many cases of each and whether we
have sustained transmission of them or
whether they are
very much isolated secondly on the
uh the efficacy of vaccines against new
variants i think all the lab studies
indicate
that yes they will work well against the
uk variant but
the real proof of that will be in data
from the real world
what evidence do you have from the
vaccine already rolled out that it is
effective against
the uk variants and can you share it
with us and just finally if we indeed do
end up needing to do some sort of boost
strategy with a
new version of a vaccine like perhaps
the one being announced by madonna today
what capacity do we have to do that and
will we mix and match
vaccines if needs be
uh thanks very much well i'll set out
where we are on the
um the variance identified here and then
ask susan again to set out the details
in terms of
any future updated
vaccine but it but really i want to
precursor all of that
by saying that um i set out the numbers
of the
new variants that we found from south
africa and brazil set those out
yesterday these are very very small
numbers in the grand scheme of things
what matters
today is that people get the vaccine
when uh when
when uh when the nhs calls um
when it all on those the new variants we
have
we have identified and are putting in
place what's called enhanced contact
tracing
which means that for each one of those
people who is identified as having a
new variant uh vaccine that we are
worried about um from abroad
uh they get a they there's a special
focus to the
um to the contact racing to make sure
that they and their contacts
self-isolate that we check that
everybody self-isolates they get all the
support possible
because it is so important that we get
those
new variants from abroad under control
we have a high degree of confidence that
this vaccine
works against the what you call the new
the uk uh new variant i think it's best
described as the
a new variant that was first discovered
in the new in the uk
um and um it is a uh
and and so you know for the purposes of
the vaccine rollout
whether you whether people have had the
old or the new variant it doesn't matter
what you need to do is get vaccinated
when the call comes
um and so the critical thing
for everybody watching is this makes it
even more important to follow the rules
and it means that we've taken the more
cautious approach to
uh to international travel that we've
introduced in the last
couple of weeks including for instance
removing the travel corridors
and under this lockdown it is illegal to
travel abroad unless you have a
reasonable excuse
because it's illegal to leave your home
unless it's for one of the very small
number of reasons
set out so those
um the change to the international rules
was because we don't want to see
the uh any of the new variants that have
that risk from the vaccine
arriving on our shores um here and we're
dealing with the ones that we've
that we've found here susan thank you so
there are four laboratories
in the uk doing detailed vaccination and
convalescence serious studies
and that's in imperial oxford and two
ph.d laboratories
portion down and collindale the
consensus view from those four
laboratories have all done different
experiments
is that the current vaccine works
against the
variant that was first discovered in the
uk that is very very reassuring
we also know from following clinical
cohorts
where we are looking at everyone who's
had prior infection and who
gets a subsequent pcr that we can't see
any change in the immune response
and the reinfection rate and those that
have had a previous infection through
our routine data sets
we're starting to do that work on south
africa the variance that was first found
in south africa that hasn't reported yet
but we will continue to look and watch
this and we expect each of those sites
to publish that data
um in its final format independently but
the consensus view as we released in our
technical statement is that this is
uh that this is working against the
current variant
thanks very much dr harris just to um
add i think to susan's comments
um it's it's important that we realize
it's quite normal for viruses to mutate
and we will have
numerous mutations as we go forward not
all of them in fact the vast majority of
them will not be of concern
and and i think importantly even though
the work is ongoing
to ensure that we understand exactly how
the vaccines work with these different
mutations we've identified
it's quite unlikely in clinical terms
that vaccines would not have some degree
of effectiveness even for new virus
virus mutations that we identify thanks
very much
indeed next question is from andy bell
at channel 5 andy
hello thank you very much um secretary
of state
um just to go back to control of borders
do you now
personally believe the time has come for
enforced
hotel quarantine for all people
coming from all destinations do you feel
we've got to that point
and the question for dr harry's um you
and
you know to be fair many other
colleagues right at the beginning of
this
felt that there was no point in
controlling people coming in once the
virus had arrived
do you feel now looking at what's
happened since that that was a mistake
well thanks for thanks very much andy i
think it is incredibly important
that we are cautious at the border and
we have changed the rules around travel
in the last uh two weeks to remove those
travel corridors
and the lockdown rules mean that it is
illegal to travel abroad
unless you have one of the reasonable
excuses that's set out in the
legislation and for instance to travel
abroad for
medical reasons although frankly given
that we've got the nhs here at home
i can see little reason to do that
so people shouldn't be traveling abroad
unless they have one of those
reasons and that's just part of the
stay-at-home
regulations it is important that we
protect
from new variants should they have
a vaccine invasion and
it is also reasonable to take a
precautionary principle
to protect this country whilst we work
on the the science and the analysis of
the different variants that are
discovered around the world
dr harris thank you um yes i i think uh
what we've always said for public health
professionals
is that once you have significant
infection in the country actually the
proportion of cases which are coming in
on your borders is very small and we
need to take
really firm action to manage infection
uh both domestically
and any that might come in i think what
is slightly different
now is we are identifying new variants
and as the secretary of state has
highlighted
there are particular measures in place
which certainly at the start of
understanding of the variant is
important for us to be able to learn
about its transmissibility and what the
impact might be
in in the country and i think the third
point is
it is usually when there are low rates
where this becomes
a really important point so having very
effective
test and trace when the rates have gone
right down and you know just to
reiterate we are not there yet there is
a lot of work to do still
with everybody's help to get those rates
of infection right down
but when they are down then that's the
time probably to
be really harboring in on infections
thanks very much um the next question is
from
uh hannah giesler at the express hannah
good afternoon
uh secretary of state a couple of
questions on variants um
you've said the evidence suggests that
vaccines will still be effective against
the new variant identified here in the
uk
but considering the increased mortality
risk is there any evidence on whether
treatments such as dexamethasone are any
less effective in patients with that new
variant
and then we've heard time and again that
vaccine uptake is going to be crucial
now that we're several weeks into the
rollout do you have any figures on the
percentage of people
offered the vaccine who are taking it so
far and if not when will you be able to
share that data
well i'm delighted to say that the
proportion of people who
are invited to come forward um who are
not taking up that chances is very very
very low
um i i i'm absolutely thrilled that
with the support of the daily express
and
all the other serious uk media outlets
this vaccination program is going well
and people's enthusiasm for taking it is
increasing and we're seeing that uptake
getting to really high levels in fact i
was talking to
a a group of doctors and
their team in yateley in hampshire today
where they've reached 98 of
all the over 80s locally who've been
vaccinated
that is a fantastic level of take-up
and they're continuing to offer
the the jab to the two percent who
haven't got there yet
um so this is um a
a rollout that is going well the
enthusiasm for taking the jab is
increasing um and i hope that we can
uh keep and keep encouraging people and
reassuring people
uh who might be wondering whether to
have the job or not that this is the
right thing to do for them
and for their uh community so
so i'm you know that is it's really
encouraging uh on the vaccine rollout
and i'm very grateful to everybody who's
helped play their part including
including the media who've been frankly
absolutely brilliant
uh in supporting the science on this one
um
and on the first question i'm going to
turn to
uh dr harris and yes and then dr
hopkins to make sure you get a full and
rigorous scientific answer
and so i might just add on to some of
the comments about people getting the
vaccine because i think
certainly directs of public health have
been working very hard at local level as
have
faith leaders as well i think have been
absolutely instrumental
in supporting individuals to understand
the vaccine
what it means and and how they might
have it and we've seen some of those
centres open up in churches and mosques
and
various other places which will i think
provide assurance to some local
communities
and that is important the point i wanted
to raise was if for example
we take some of the very high risk areas
so care homes are something which uh
is particularly at the top of my mind we
know that the elderly residents are
taking that up but perhaps care home
staff
were slow to start with and perhaps bit
reluctant we know
that with more information uh they have
then been reassured and come back and
that's important because an area like a
care home
is uh is in itself a bit like a mini
population
so it's really important that both the
residents and the staff
are vaccinated as well but on the data
so high-level data is already published
i think it's an hsc
data susan will clarify that
i know directors of public health have
had a first tranche of
of data and again really important that
we understand
not just that people have been
vaccinated but the ages of those
individuals
where they live the sorts of roles
they're doing in the health and care
sector and that information
is starting to flow it's a huge task and
susan might want to add
but i know even today a large data
linkage has
gone through nhse and is
promoting that data the important thing
is that local communities have the
granularity the real level of data
that allows them to access and support
people in their programs
thanks very much i'll just add on
particularly on the dexamethasone so dex
medicine the studies that were done in
the uk
through the largest study in the world
recovery have really transformed
people who are admitted to hospital and
who need oxygen
and improve survival we see no signals
at the moment that hospital
there's increased hospitalization rate
with the new variant
and we're not seeing a clear signal at
all that that the that has changed with
dexamethasone
so we would expect dexamethasone to work
perfectly because this is
about reducing your own immune response
and calming that down so that your body
can get over this virus with its own
immune response
so we expect that dexmedson will still
be effective
in reducing mortality uh with this virus
and we expect that hospitals will
continue to give it which they are doing
at a very very high level
to anyone who needs oxygen who's
admitted
so it's very it's reassuring that our
assessment is that the vaccine works
against the new variant
and that the treatments work against the
new variant but it's passes from one
person to another so much
more easily that we've all got to just
be extra careful
to uh stop uh passing it on because
that's how we're going to get this under
control thank you very much
indeed hannah next question from dan
o'donoghue from the preston journal dan
hello just two quick questions for you
health secretary and
why do you think scotland has the
slowest vaccination rate in the uk
and secondly we've seen another weekend
of polls show majority support for
scottish independence
do you think your performance in the
performance of your westminster
colleagues over the last year has helped
or hindered the case for the union
well i think the case for the union is
undoubtedly strengthened
by the work that we've done and shown
how over this pandemic we're stronger
as one united kingdom uh and you know i
mentioned the
um the work that the nhs does with the
mutual aid between
different parts of the nhs but i'll just
pick out one example and that's the
vaccine rollout we both invested in the
science of this
vaccine and bought the vaccines that we
brought from it bought from
international
companies as a uk government for the
whole of the uk
we've then rolled it out to all
different parts of the uk through the
nhs including in the three devolved
nations
and as a result of this other than
israel and the united arab emirates we
have the fastest
vaccine rollout in the world and that's
a sign of what the uk can do
when we pull together and i think that
for
all those in scotland who are uh
considering this question what i'd say
as secretary of state is that we're so
much stronger together
it means an awful lot to to me and my
english uk colleagues in the
in the uk government that we are one
union that can pull together when things
get difficult
and that's an argument that i think
is resoundingly powerful that this uk
vaccine
delivered by welsh and scottish and
northern irish colleagues in the nhs as
well as of course all the way across
england
that is a real example of this country
firing on all cylinders
and i i think that i know that
colleagues
in the scottish government are working
incredibly hard to roll this out
across the whole of scotland and the nhs
in scotland i think is doing an
absolutely terrific job at getting this
rolled out
i think that it is all about how we
work together and um you know if this
pandemic has taught us anything
it's that we all rely on each other and
that's best done
as one united kingdom thanks dan next
question
is lauren from lawrence dunhill from the
health service journal lawrence
hi thank you um the national institute
of health protection
is supposed to launch next in two months
time and take over test and trace
is that still the plan and have you
found someone to lead that organization
yet
the job advert for the chief exec role
said an appointment would be made
by the end of december and on
vaccinations
the prime minister has said the issue of
vaccine wastage
is very important and we've been told
that it's very low
but we have no information about what
that means or how the wastage rates
differ between regions
vaccine centers and priority groups will
you commit to publishing detailed wasted
traits
well obviously reducing the wastage rate
is incredibly important
and um we we exchanged best practice and
part of the standard operating procedure
is constantly kept under review to see
how we can reduce the amount of wastage
on the
national institute for health protection
absolutely that is on track to
launch in april and it
has a very very important role at
pulling together all the different parts
of the
health protection response and making
sure that we have one institution that
is constantly on the lookout
for not just the response to this
pandemic
to make sure but to make sure that we
are as prepared as we possibly can be
in fact in many ways um that pulling
together is already
happening uh susan is the medical
director both for nhs test and trace
and for public health england and the
deputy chief medical officer works
across all of those different
organizations
so on the ground this is all being this
is all as you can imagine
being pulled together and we have that
rollout plan uh in hand unless there's
anything
either you want to add thanks very much
for that question
my two questions were actually are you
going to publish some detailed wastage
rates
and have you have you appointed the
chief exec for the new organization yet
yeah and on the wastage rates um i'm i
set out where we're up to in terms of
wastage rates i'm very happy to look
into
further publications and in terms of the
nihp uh there'll be an announcement
uh as soon as it's me as soon as the
decision is made thanks very much indeed
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news